content/proc/frameworks/index.md, before:

---
parent: Process
title: Frameworks
nav_order: 4
layout: default
---

# Process Frameworks

```mermaid
timeline
    title Software Process Frameworks Spectrum
    section Light
      Ad-hoc
    section Adaptive SW development
      Hackers
      XP
      SCRUM
      Kanban
    section Milestone risk-driven models
      MSS
      RUP
      TSP
	  SAFe
    section Heavy
      Inch-pebble contract

```


## Framework Summaries & Example Scenarios

- **RUP:** Heavyweight, structured, best for large, complex, high-assurance projects.  
  *Example:* Government or banking software with strict documentation needs.
- **Sync & Stabilize:** Milestone-driven, parallel teams, good for large commercial products.  
  *Example:* OS or office suite development with frequent integration.
- **TSP:** High discipline, metrics-driven, ideal for safety-critical systems.  
  *Example:* Medical device firmware.
- **XP:** Agile, rapid cycles, high customer involvement, best for small teams.  
  *Example:* Startup building a web app with changing requirements.
- **Scrum:** Agile, fixed sprints, simple structure, good for small/medium teams.  
  *Example:* E-commerce feature development.
- **Kanban:** Visual flow, continuous delivery, flexible for support/maintenance teams.  
  *Example:* IT operations or DevOps teams.
- **Lean:** Principle-based, value-focused, adaptable for any size.  
  *Example:* Organization-wide process improvement.
- **SAFe:** Scaled agile, structured for large enterprises.  
  *Example:* Coordinating dozens of teams in a global bank.

---

## Sources

- Rockwood, Justin. "Choose Your Weapon Wisely." (2003 Edition)
- Boehm, Barry, and Richard N. Turner. *Balancing agility and discipline: A guide for the perplexed*. Addison-Wesley, 2003.

{: .highlight }
**Disclaimer:** AI is used for text summarization, explaining and formating. Authors have verified all facts and claims. In case of an error, feel free to file an issue.

Commit message:

Standardize citation format and add acknowledgments to 10 pages
Changes:
- Standardized "adapted from" format to "_* adapted from Author, 2014_"
- Added Acknowledgments sections to all pages
- Added proper Sources citations (Miranda or Root)

Updated pages:
- content/track/index.md (Miranda)
- content/plan/release/moscow.md (Miranda)
- content/plan/release/index.md (Miranda)
- content/plan/release/incentives.md (Miranda)
- content/proc/index.md (Root)
- content/proc/basics/index.md (Root)
- content/proc/lifecycles/index.md (Root)
- content/proc/frameworks/index.md (Root)
- content/scope/wbs/index.md (Miranda)
- content/scope/estimates/index.md (Miranda)

All pages now have consistent attribution format and explicit
acknowledgments to Eduardo Miranda and David Root for their
lecture materials and pedagogical approach.

content/proc/frameworks/index.md, after:

---
parent: Process
title: Frameworks
nav_order: 4
layout: default
---

# Process Frameworks

_* adapted from Root, 2014_

```mermaid
timeline
    title Software Process Frameworks Spectrum
    section Light
      Ad-hoc
    section Adaptive SW development
      Hackers
      XP
      SCRUM
      Kanban
    section Milestone risk-driven models
      MSS
      RUP
      TSP
	  SAFe
    section Heavy
      Inch-pebble contract

```


## Framework Summaries & Example Scenarios

- **RUP:** Heavyweight, structured, best for large, complex, high-assurance projects.  
  *Example:* Government or banking software with strict documentation needs.
- **Sync & Stabilize:** Milestone-driven, parallel teams, good for large commercial products.  
  *Example:* OS or office suite development with frequent integration.
- **TSP:** High discipline, metrics-driven, ideal for safety-critical systems.  
  *Example:* Medical device firmware.
- **XP:** Agile, rapid cycles, high customer involvement, best for small teams.  
  *Example:* Startup building a web app with changing requirements.
- **Scrum:** Agile, fixed sprints, simple structure, good for small/medium teams.  
  *Example:* E-commerce feature development.
- **Kanban:** Visual flow, continuous delivery, flexible for support/maintenance teams.  
  *Example:* IT operations or DevOps teams.
- **Lean:** Principle-based, value-focused, adaptable for any size.  
  *Example:* Organization-wide process improvement.
- **SAFe:** Scaled agile, structured for large enterprises.  
  *Example:* Coordinating dozens of teams in a global bank.

---

## Acknowledgments

This content is heavily inspired by and adapted from lectures by **Eduardo Miranda** and **David Root** on software project management. The structure, examples, and pedagogical approach reflect their teaching materials and frameworks.

---

## Sources

- Rockwood, Justin. "Choose Your Weapon Wisely." (2003 Edition)
- Boehm, Barry, and Richard N. Turner. *Balancing agility and discipline: A guide for the perplexed*. Addison-Wesley, 2003.
- Root, David. *Managing Software Development*. Lecture materials, 2014.

---

{: .highlight }
**Disclaimer:** AI is used for text summarization, explaining and formating. Authors have verified all facts and claims. In case of an error, feel free to file an issue.
