content/proc/lifecycles/index.md, before:

---
parent: Process
title: Lifecycles
nav_order: 3
layout: default
---

# Why Care About Lifecycles?

Understanding software lifecycles is essential for effective communication and project management:

- **Communication:**  
  - Helps team members discuss plans and progress.
  - Enables management to track project status.
  - Gives customers a clear idea of what happens next.

---

## Definition

- **Cambridge Dictionary:**  
  “The series of changes that a living thing goes through from the beginning of its life until death.”  
  “The length of time that something lasts or can be used.”

- **Reifer (1997):**  
  “Period of time that begins when a software product is conceived and ends when the product is retired from use.”

---

## Software Lifecycle

The software lifecycle describes the cradle-to-grave existence of a software product or software-intensive system.  
It includes:
- Initial development
- Repairs and enhancements
- Decommissioning

**Why is this important?**  
Managing the entire lifecycle requires deeper knowledge than just basic development experience.  
It involves planning for maintenance, upgrades, and eventual retirement.

---

## Lifecycle Models

Lifecycle models generalize the software development process into steps with associated activities and artifacts.

- **Purpose:**  
  - Model how a project is planned, controlled, and monitored from inception to completion.
  - Provide a starting point for defining project activities.
  - Help clarify what the end point of a project is.

---

## Process vs. Lifecycle

**Process:**  
- A sequence of steps performed for a given purpose.  
- Webster’s: “A series of actions or operations conducing to an end.”

**Lifecycle:**  
- The overall journey of a software product from conception to retirement.

**Key Differences:**
- A **process** refers to the specific steps used in an organization to build systems.
- A **lifecycle model** is a higher-level framework that outlines phases but not detailed activities.
- Process definitions include more detail than lifecycle models.
- Software processes are sometimes defined within the context of a lifecycle model.

**Note:**  
The concept of software process is rarely presented in undergraduate education, but is critical for professional practice.

---

## Common Software Lifecycle Models

- **Ad Hoc:** No formal structure; processes are improvised.
- **Iterative:** Development cycles through repeated refinement.
- **Incremental:** System built in small, functional pieces.
- **Classic (Waterfall):** Sequential phases; each must be completed before the next begins.
- **Prototype:** Early versions built to clarify requirements.
- **RAD (Rapid Application Development):** Emphasizes quick development and iteration.
- **Spiral:** Combines iterative development with risk analysis.
- **WinWin:** Focuses on stakeholder negotiation and agreement.
- **V Model:** Emphasizes verification and validation at each stage.
- **Chaos:** Recognizes unpredictability and adapts to change.

---

## Key Takeaways

- Lifecycle models help teams and organizations plan, communicate, and manage software projects from start to finish.
- Understanding the difference between process and lifecycle is crucial for defining roles, responsibilities, and activities.
- Choosing the right lifecycle model depends on project needs, team experience, and organizational context.

---

{: .highlight }
**Disclaimer:** AI is used for text polishing and explaining. Authors have verified all facts and claims. In case of an error, feel free to file an issue.

Commit message:

Standardize citation format and add acknowledgments to 10 pages
Changes:
- Standardized "adapted from" format to "_* adapted from Author, 2014_"
- Added Acknowledgments sections to all pages
- Added proper Sources citations (Miranda or Root)

Updated pages:
- content/track/index.md (Miranda)
- content/plan/release/moscow.md (Miranda)
- content/plan/release/index.md (Miranda)
- content/plan/release/incentives.md (Miranda)
- content/proc/index.md (Root)
- content/proc/basics/index.md (Root)
- content/proc/lifecycles/index.md (Root)
- content/proc/frameworks/index.md (Root)
- content/scope/wbs/index.md (Miranda)
- content/scope/estimates/index.md (Miranda)

All pages now have consistent attribution format and explicit
acknowledgments to Eduardo Miranda and David Root for their
lecture materials and pedagogical approach.

content/proc/lifecycles/index.md, after:

---
parent: Process
title: Lifecycles
nav_order: 3
layout: default
---

# Why Care About Lifecycles?

_* adapted from Root, 2014_

Understanding software lifecycles is essential for effective communication and project management:

- **Communication:**  
  - Helps team members discuss plans and progress.
  - Enables management to track project status.
  - Gives customers a clear idea of what happens next.

---

## Definition

- **Cambridge Dictionary:**  
  “The series of changes that a living thing goes through from the beginning of its life until death.”  
  “The length of time that something lasts or can be used.”

- **Reifer (1997):**  
  “Period of time that begins when a software product is conceived and ends when the product is retired from use.”

---

## Software Lifecycle

The software lifecycle describes the cradle-to-grave existence of a software product or software-intensive system.  
It includes:
- Initial development
- Repairs and enhancements
- Decommissioning

**Why is this important?**  
Managing the entire lifecycle requires deeper knowledge than just basic development experience.  
It involves planning for maintenance, upgrades, and eventual retirement.

---

## Lifecycle Models

Lifecycle models generalize the software development process into steps with associated activities and artifacts.

- **Purpose:**  
  - Model how a project is planned, controlled, and monitored from inception to completion.
  - Provide a starting point for defining project activities.
  - Help clarify what the end point of a project is.

---

## Process vs. Lifecycle

**Process:**  
- A sequence of steps performed for a given purpose.  
- Webster’s: “A series of actions or operations conducing to an end.”

**Lifecycle:**  
- The overall journey of a software product from conception to retirement.

**Key Differences:**
- A **process** refers to the specific steps used in an organization to build systems.
- A **lifecycle model** is a higher-level framework that outlines phases but not detailed activities.
- Process definitions include more detail than lifecycle models.
- Software processes are sometimes defined within the context of a lifecycle model.

**Note:**  
The concept of software process is rarely presented in undergraduate education, but is critical for professional practice.

---

## Common Software Lifecycle Models

- **Ad Hoc:** No formal structure; processes are improvised.
- **Iterative:** Development cycles through repeated refinement.
- **Incremental:** System built in small, functional pieces.
- **Classic (Waterfall):** Sequential phases; each must be completed before the next begins.
- **Prototype:** Early versions built to clarify requirements.
- **RAD (Rapid Application Development):** Emphasizes quick development and iteration.
- **Spiral:** Combines iterative development with risk analysis.
- **WinWin:** Focuses on stakeholder negotiation and agreement.
- **V Model:** Emphasizes verification and validation at each stage.
- **Chaos:** Recognizes unpredictability and adapts to change.

---

## Key Takeaways

- Lifecycle models help teams and organizations plan, communicate, and manage software projects from start to finish.
- Understanding the difference between process and lifecycle is crucial for defining roles, responsibilities, and activities.
- Choosing the right lifecycle model depends on project needs, team experience, and organizational context.

---

## Acknowledgments

This content is heavily inspired by and adapted from lectures by **Eduardo Miranda** and **David Root** on software project management. The structure, examples, and pedagogical approach reflect their teaching materials and frameworks.

---

## Sources

- Root, David. *Managing Software Development*. Lecture materials, 2014.

---

{: .highlight }
**Disclaimer:** AI is used for text polishing and explaining. Authors have verified all facts and claims. In case of an error, feel free to file an issue.
